---
layout: page
title: Thunkable App Development Education for Technovation Girls
description: Helping students solve a problem they love with technology with block based programming.
img: /assets/img/education/nougyou-arigatou-farmer-list.png
importance: 1
category: education
---

I was able to become a Staff Software Engineer on Google Translate in part
because my father surrounded me with programming at a very early age.  Even
though the work he did then was very different from what I do now, I learned
that I could solve a lot of problems with technology.  Not everyone has that
opportunity.  Knowing this, I always seek out ways to help students learn
the same excitement I learned.

This project came about through the Japan Chapter of the [Technovation
Challenge](https://technovationchallenge.org/),
[Waffle](https://waffle-waffle.org/).  The Technovation challenge gives
junior high and high school female students a chance to solve a community
problem with technology and develop their problem solving and leadership
skills.  Waffle runs the Japan branch of the challenge along with other
projects that close the gender gap by educating women to be a part of the
tech industry.  

![農業ありがとう- Demo App](/assets/img/education/nougyou-arigatou-farmer-list.png)

As a team we put together a 6 day coding bootcamp teaching essential lessons
for app development using [Thunkable](https://thunkable.com/), the block
based app building framework.  I focused on building a small MVP demo
application that showcased the major lesson points.  The lessons spanned
from interactive pages, using cloud data, multi-page apps along with core
coding fundamentals like loops, variables, and conditionals.  We designed
everything to work well for students that had little to no experience coding
and aimed to teach them just enoguh to build their own MVP solving a
community problem associated with one of the United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals.

We call the little demo app 農業ありがとう or in English, Thank you Farmer.
It's a simple app that let's consumers share messages with local produce
farmers and help those farmers receive recognition beyond their products.

![農業ありがとう- Demo App](/assets/img/education/nougyou-arigatou-farmer-profile.png)

Thanks to the bootcamp, many of the teams were able to start building their
app for the Technovation Challenge with the lessons they learned and build
apps far more complicated and exciting than our little instructional demo
app. 
