---
layout: post
title: Committing to Open Source Incentives
description: Why secret job ladders do more harm than algorithms
tags: values
---

The [Untangled
Newsletter](https://untangled.substack.com/p/-some-unsatisfying-solutions-for)
recently walked through the many reasons Facebook will remain a dominant
internet player even with an increase in scrutiny and regulation.  The
key takeaway was a lack of true accountability or really any form of
leverage to change the structures within Facebook which produce social
harms.

The other big tech corporations, or big corporations in general, have the
same malady.  They have incentive structures and behavioral patterns that
live deep within their organizations.  Structures as deep and fundamental
as bones.  Also about as visible as bones typically are.  But like bones,
they support the overall structure and enable repeated behaviors and
foster a continuous mindset.  Those behaviors and mindsets then
repeatedly produce mistaken decisions, bad products, or unintentional
harm.

One key layer to the incentive skeleton system is the performance review
and all that backs those reviews.  Job codes, or job roles, detail an
employees key responsibilities.  It also details what an employee can
safely ignore.  For example, a job code allows any employee to look at a
problem and readily say "that's not my problem, talk to this other
person".  It permits endless punting.

But more than a role description we find the job ladder.  A job ladder
helps an individual self manage their performance at their current level
and set their sights on doing "next level" work.  It makes clear what's
rewarded, what's incentivized, what's measured, and what's not.  The
contents of the job ladder provide a very clear and mostly well defined
incentive environment.  Every word in that job ladder carries heavy
consequences.

Take for example community building.  A wide range of activities build up
an organizations culture like planning team socials, bringing team
members together with ice breakers, or celebrations such as holiday
parties.  One job ladder may reward these activities and thus encourage 
anyone in that ladder to help out and contribute to the culture.  Another
job ladder may leave this detail out and thus anyone under said job
ladder would be fully rational in ignoring all forms of cultural
development.  When pressure develops a good culture will die due to
neglect when the job ladder forgets to mention it.

What's more, job ladders are built not just for employees but also for
managers.  Managers help assess and rate how well an employee is doing.
A manager gauges if the employees is on target, living up to the job
ladder's description.  If they are over-performing and doing "next level"
work.  And given that managers have a lot to do, they prefer ladders with
very measurable outcomes.  Sales targets are optimal.  Features launched
are pretty good.  Concrete efficiency numbers are excellent.  Capacity to
make ethical decisions are a burden to evaluate.  So you'll find job
ladders orienting towards bullet points that can be well explained and
well defended with evidence so that a manager can rationalize their
rating decisions.

That tendency to improve measurement has a cost. A clear cost of failing
to incentivize the really hard work that reduces disasters.  The critical
work of debating ethical options and opting not to do something.  The
messy work of bringing in critical and negative feedback.  This is
sometimes solved by a dedicated role, but shouldn't the hard ethical work
be part of the culture? Something everyone does all the time?

So how does a company do better? Sharing job ladders openly is a start.
But ultimately that is just a form of transparency without
accountability.  External observers can read the ladder and make
critiques but have no real leverage to influence the ladders development.
So what about going further and adopting open source practices.

Imagine a job ladder that is out in the open and which anyone can change
it, with some amount of review and revision.  The public, at any time,
could make a git pull request and update some portion of a company's job
ladder with the public's incentives baked in.  They could for example
demand that ethical work be made part of all job ladders.

It'd be hell for managers as they would be bound to measuring and gauging
success along a completely unpredictable set of requirements.  But should
we really stress about making a manager's life more difficult when the
cost disincentivizes ethical decision making?
