---
layout: post
title: Making NFTs into the Commons
description: Where I speculate on how NFTs could walk a Copy Left transition
tags: web3
---

Okay so, NFTs (Non-Fungible Tokens) are technically some piece of digital art
that exist somewhere.  Maybe on a personal web server.  Maybe on an AWS S3
Bucket.  Maybe on some other Big Tech platform.  Maybe even could be living on
IPFS.  The NFT isn't exactly the piece of digital art (since one could make
NFTs for off-chain arts) nor is it the rights to the digital art (NFTs in
general don't need to specify or detail any kind of license).  The NFT is more
like a badge of honor, or a proof of provenance, for supporting the creator,
either directly or indirectly through a secondary market.

For the digital art backing the NFT, what are it's rights and permissions and
how does the NFT-ness interact with those rights and permissions?  And how
could (or should) those aspects change over time as the NFT develops?  If the
piece of art exists off chain it could already have a form of license and
rights attached to it that limit it's re-use, for example with a restrictive
Copyright.  Same even if the NFT lives fully on Chain, the creator could only
permit the right to read and observe the thing and trade the access rights.
In those settings, NFTs don't really do anything radical.  Intellectual
Property still exists as we've been familiar with it and now we just have a
new ownership system that does a better job of paying trailing royalties to
creators even in secondary markets.

But let's get silly.

I've always felt that cultural icons like Mickey Mouse should have entered the
commons (or properly the Public Domain) long ago.  With a positive framing,
Mickey Mouse is famous not because Walt Disney made a really cool and
creative mouse but because Mickey Mouse participated in a series stories and
challenges that reflected problems and difficulties we all face.  And at a
certain point, Mickey Mouse began to reflect the life situations for a growing
subset of society.  Mickey even went international.   It's only due to
Copyright law that the Disney Corporation was the central manager for these
stories.  Had Mickey Mouse entered public domain, which should have happened
some number of years after Walt Disney's death, an even larger number could
have told stories with Mickey that captured even more of our life stories.

Copyright has an approach for this.  In some countries, 70 years after a
creators death a work of art enters into the Public Domain and it's officially
part of The Commons, the thing we all steward into the future.  But Mickey
Mouse and plenty of other creations outlive this deadline and have managed to
remain under Copyright for "reasons".

But could this be done and enforced more naturally with the blockchain such
that there's no wiggle room?  A totally blockchain native NFT could evolve its
license over time based on some pre-defined schema and schedule.  At a
technical level, this is pretty easy as it would just be some attribute that
changes in a smart contract much like levels for Crypto Zombies.  This
attribute would just be the particular license attached to the NFT.

A creator could use a range of schemas and schedules in fun combinations.  One
could for example make license transitions according to the total net worth of
the NFT according to DAI.  Or one could make license transitions following the
number and size of secondary sales such that the n-th secondary sale triggers
a change.  Or transitions could be triggered by the number of derivatives,
follow on pieces of work or financial derivatives.

The transition schedules in an ideal scenario would go from restrictive rights
to ultimately the Public Domain.  Here, a creator could select the Creative
Commons Non-Commercial Share-Alike license and thereby ensure no one can
commercially compete with them using the work of art for some period of time.
Once the work has supported the creator sufficiently, the work could drop the
Non-Commercial clause and become a simple Creative Commons Share-Alike
license.  And once the work really hits critical mass it explicitly goes into
the Public Domains with an explicit Creative Commons 0 license.

And all of this would be self managed and self enforced by the smart contract
wrapping the NFT itself.  We wouldn't be beholden to a corporation making
these changes or Copyright lawyers negotiating these changes.

At the end of the day this would be transitioning more works of art to The
Commons, a resource we all steward and all benefit from.  By that point
ideally creators would have moved on to create other follow on works that
support them and made enough from any royalties on secondary sales.  One the
final transition to Public Domain happens the NFT itself could be burned or
could automatically route a growing share of royalties to public goods
funding.

The really fun stage would be when whole libraries of works change as a bulk,
essentially working as a Common Pool Resource.  Even if some of the works
don't hit the milestones for transitions, the pool as a whole might be
culturally significant that all entries in the pool should change in tandem.
Perhaps these transitions could also bake into them an expansion of who owns
or governs them. For example, the Song a Day library is currently owned fully
by the Song A Day DAO.  But at some point, perhaps the library's contract
could require additional DAOs to be brought on as owners.  Each transition
would bring on more and more governors until finally it's in The Commons and
somehow everyone governs and benefits from the library.

A key part to making this all work is likely the works living entirely
on-chain so that smart contracts can manage these attributes and enforce the
transitions.  You can't really change the licenses for off chain works of art
like the Mona Lisa as no one would realistically respect that declaration.
But a fully on chain entity would exist as both the entity and the license and
the transition rules.  At that point, I suspect, there'd be less room for
untrustworthy actors to develop workarounds.

Even with that challenge and a lot of open details, this could be pretty rad.
